---
title: Smart Players, Outline Players
---

# Smart Players, Outline Players

topics: NBA, optimization

NBA success is about maximizing player value subject to salary cap and player availability constraints. Even in the modern era, as understanding of non-scoring value has advanced and plus-minus stats have proliferated, the value of smart players is underrated. This inefficiency perpetuates itself in part because of a bias toward things that can be measured (and therefore justified) and in part because teams fail to fully take into account player behavior beyond their current contract.

The clearest way to approach this topic is looking at some of the overpaid players in the NBA. Take Andrew Wiggins, for example. Andrew Wiggins was a replacement-level player for the first four years of his career, *and still got a max-level contract*. How could the Timberwolves make such an expensive mistake? Well, Wiggins' main strength is points per game. To stereotype: players whose main strength are almost never going to get underpaid. What is Wiggins weak at? Passing, rebounding, defense, off-ball movement (i.e. the vast majority of actions within a game).

Let's look at some other overpaid players (who weren't tanked by injury). Harrison Barnes: replacement-level, signed to a long-term extension for 20m/year, main strength points per game, bad at passing and rebounding and off-ball movement. CJ McCollum: way overpaid, main strength points per game, bad at passing, rebounding, and defense. DeMar DeRozan, secretly a replacement-level player, tanked the Raptors for years on a fair-seeming contract.

Correspondingly, let's look at some sub-max players who provided large surplus values. Patty Mills has been underpaid for a decade. Manu Ginobili took less than market value pretty much his whole career. Marcus Smart, despite being a high lottery pick, agreed to a very reasonable extension that he's massively outperforming. Players who have a team-oriented skillset -- hustle on defense, movement on offense, quick decision-making, rarely stall out offensive possessions -- not only overperform their stats, but (I theorize) their general unselfish, team-first attitude means they tend not to press their teams too hard on their salaries.

The Spurs are an interesting case of this. When they won their most recent title, it was through ball movement, accurate three-point shooting, excellent spacing, and team-first play. However, recent Spurs teams have eschewed 3s almost entirely and have been, seemingly intentionally, built around ball-stopping midrange artists like LaMarcus Aldridge and the aforementioned DeMar DeRozan. Why? Well, my theory is that Pop's overall preference to pick up low-ego, hard-working players (often non-American: the AAU circuit tends to reward individual play relative to foreign academies) almost coincidentally resulted in him picking up a core that happened to play this way. Furthermore, he was able to keep this core together because important players like Mills, Ginobili, and Tiago Splitter were comfortable playing for much lower salaries than modern analytics would argue they deserved.

When this generation of players aged out, Pop's efforts to recreate them failed to generate the same magic: DeMar DeRozan, by all accounts, is a hard-working, high-character dude, but he's the anti-Patty-Mills on the court. Pop's playoff foibles after that title (refusing to sit Tony Parker for the superior shooter Patty Mills against the Clippers, playing Tim Duncan and Boban Marjanovic together (!) against the Thunder before even trying Kawhi Leonard at power forward) support the hypothesis that he didn't fully understand why that title team was so good.

What are the implications of this for team-building? The most important implication is that teams should prioritize high-BBIQ players in the draft even more than they normally do. When drafting a player, teams should consider how much surplus value they can hope to get on a second (and maybe even third) contract. A hit on a smart player will often generate substantial value not only on their first contract (Draymond Green as a starter in the Warriors' 2015 championship) but on their second contract as well (Draymond Green signing a 5/82 extension immediately afterwards). Low-BBIQ players, who, if worth drafting and playing at all, tend to be primary scorers, might still provide value on a rookie contract, but will be fairly paid or overpaid on subsequent deals. Brandon Ingram's best season was a +2.2 season, and his career BPM is -1.4; yet, he's going to get a maximum contract this offseason. This is what you get in the scenario where your low-BBIQ scorer "hits."
